# 01 Different Derivations (Lab)

Consider again grammar `G₀`. Give two _different_ derivations of `Dave runs`.

First derivation:

S → NP VP
→PN VP
→Dave V
→Dave runs

Second derivation:
S →NP VP
→PN VP
→PN V
→PN runs
→Dave runs

# 02 Equivalent Languages (Lab)

Let `G₂' = (T, N, P, S)` with `T = {a}`, `N = {S}` productions `P`:

```
S → ε
S → Sa
```

Prove that `L(G₂') = {aⁿ | n ≥ 0}`, which is the same as `L(G₂)` from the course notes.

We prove this formally by inclusion in both directions. By definition of `L(G₂)`,

```
{χ ∈ T* | S ⇒ᐩ χ} ⊆ {aⁿ | n ≥ 0}
```

means that for every `χ ∈ T*` that is derivable from `S` there exists an `n ≥ 0` such that `χ = aⁿ`. We show this by induction over the length of derivations.

-   _Base._ Suppose `χ` is derived directly from `S` by `S ⇒ χ`, which leaves only `χ = ε` according to the first production. Then `χ = a⁰`.
-   _Step._ Suppose `χ` is derived from `S` in multiple steps, which leaves only `S ⇒ Sa ⇒* χ` according to the second production. Then `χ` must be `ωa` to be derivable from `Sa`. As the derivation `S ⇒* ω` is shorter than the derivation of `S ⇒* χ`, by induction assumption there exists an `n` such that `ω = aⁿ`. Therefore `χ = ωa = aⁿa = aⁿ⁺¹`.

The inclusion in the other direction means that every `aⁿ` for `n ≥ 0` can be derived from `S`:

```
{aⁿ | n ≥ 0} ⊆ {χ ∈ T* | S ⇒ᐩ χ}
```

We show this by induction over `n`.

-   _Base._ obviously `a⁰ = ε` can be generated by the first production, `S ⇒ᐩ ε`.
-   _Step._ Suppose `aⁿ` can be generated, `S ⇒ᐩ aⁿ`. We need to show that `aⁿ⁺¹` can be generated as well. This follows from `S ⇒ Sa ⇒ᐩ aⁿa = aⁿ⁺¹`.

Thus, we can conclude `L(G₂)' = {aⁿ | n ≥ 0}`.

# 03 Derivation in Copy Language (Lab)

S

$\rightarrow$ aAS

$\rightarrow$ aAbBS

$\rightarrow$ abASb

$\rightarrow$ abAbBSb

$\rightarrow$ abbABSb

$\rightarrow$ abbASbb

$\rightarrow$ abbSabb

$\rightarrow$ abbabb

# 04 Ambiguity in English (Lab)

A well-known syntactically ambiguous English sentence is `Time flies like an arrow`. Explain the ambiguity!

[ Time flies ] like [an arrow], i.e the species of time flies happen to like an arrow or

TIme [flies [like [an arrow]]], i.e time flies figurateively very fast like an arrorw.

First interpretation does not semantically make sense.


