COMPSCI 3SH3 Fall, 2022
By: Nathan Agbomedarho
Student ID: 400081762
Date: October 23 2022
<h1 align="center"> Assignment 1 </h1>

# Introduction

**Q1 (4 marks): What is the purpose of interrupts? How does an interrupt differ from a trap? Can traps be generated intentionally by a user program? If so, for what purpose?**

The flow of control in a system or a program needs to be changed sometimes, as such an interrupt generates a signal through the computer's hardware to the OS that alters this flow of control. Interrupt handlers handle interrupts; if more than one is active, the handler executes them sequentially based on their priority. Once the interrupt has been executed, control is relinquished to the program/context.

Traps are interrupts generated by software, instead of hardware in the case of interrupts. They are used to invoke system calls, and there are some differences between them and interrupts. Primarily, unlike interrupts, traps can't disable hardware and trap handlers operate synchronously as opposed to interrupts which operate asynchronously. Traps are not required to preserve the state of the CPU while interrupts must fulfill this requirment.

Traps can be generated intentionally, for exmple to throw an exception to handle errors.

**Q2(6 marks): Direct memory access is used for high-speed I/O devices in order to avoid increasing the CPU’s execution load.**

**a)** **How does the CPU interface with the device to coordinate the transfer?**

The CPU starts by setting the Direct Memory Access registers. This requires a pointer to the source of the transfer, the pointer to the destination and the count of the amount of bytes to be transferred. The DMA controller then puts the addresses on the bus to execute the transfers, so that the CPU can handle other processes.
**b)**      **How does the CPU know when the memory operations are complete?**

The CPU is interrupted by the DMA controller once the transfer is finished and the bytes have been transferred.

**c)**       **The CPU is allowed to execute other programs while the DMA controller is transferring data. Does this process interfere with the execution of the user programs? If so, describe what forms of interference are caused.**

The CPU and DMA controller are bus masters, this means there would be issues if they both want to access memory simultaneously. As such there needs to be a mechanism involved to prevent such an eventuality from occuring with the DMA and CPU controller when they want to access the memory bus. The CPU can access data in it's caches, and this could result in problems if the CPU and DMA controllers wish to update the same location in the memory in the cache.

# OS Structures

**Q1(6 marks): How are iOS and Android similar? How are they different?**

Android and iOS are both operating systems for mobile devices, they're both based on UNIX and are built with C/C++. They both have the basic functions of telephones (calling, texting, voice, GPS). They have similar UI elements, with smooth touch screen operations and also sharp camera capabilites.

Where they differ however is that Android is based on the open-source monolithic Linux kernel that allows for a considerable amount of customization, while iOS is a Hybrid closed-source OS focused on privacy; which means it heavily restricts modifications to the OS and the system. Android allows for different brands to put their own spin on the Android system, while with iOS there is only one manufacturer: Apple.


**Q2(4) marks:**

**a)** **What is the purpose of system calls?**

System calls provide OS services, such as memory management, I/O handling, networking etc.

**b)** **What is the purpose of system programs?**

System programs handle the activities, functions and operations of the hardware and software of the OS.

**c)** **What is the purpose of the command interpreter? Why is it usually separated from the kernel?**

The command interpreter, known as the command shell, provides communication between the OS and the user to make it easier to use certain feautures of the computer, increasing productivity and efficiency. In UNIX, shells have specific syntax and operation structures, which allowes for the creation of automated shell scripts. The shell is typically separate from the kernel, as the kernel is the base of OS which handles all operations that take place. The shell however, provides an interface to execute commands and translate them to low-level kernel calls, as such it is subject to change, whereas a kernel can only be changed through specific operations.

# Processes

**Question 3.13: Using the program in Listing 1, identify the values of pid at lines A, B, C, and D (Assume that the actual pids of the parent and child are 2600 and 2603, respectively)**

A = 0, PID is 0 in a child process

B = 2603

C = 2603

D = 2600

**Question 3.3: Original versions of Apple’s mobile iOS operating system provided no means of concurrent processing. Discuss three major complications that concurrent processing adds to an operating system.**

1. Care needs to be taken when using concurrent programming. Deadlocks, which occur when multiple threads/processes are waiting for resources to be released from another thread/process, is a situation which needs to be to be avoided, as it can have debilitating effects on the performance of the OS, as no other actions can be taken while in a deadlock state.

2. Processes and system resources are protected from each other, as such memory limits must be implemented, determing resource allocation for each process and the operations it can execute on hardware.
3. Time sharing is a mechanism that has to be implemented, to ensure that each process has access to the system. In order to achieve this, a pre-emptive approach to processes interaction (voluntary release) with the CPU must be implemented and processes must be able to execute kernel code concurrently.